add docs how to debug Kibana using log correlation (#119640)
elastic/kibana: docs/developer/getting-started/debugging.asciidoc

----
./scripts/compose.py stop
----

> === Using Kibana sever logs

Reviewer: typo:
```suggestion
=== Using Kibana server logs
```

Let's start by defining a problem area you are interested in. For example, you might be interested in seeing how a particular Kibana Plugin is performing, so no need to gather logs for all of Kibana. Or you want to focus on a particular feature, such as requests from the Kibana server to the Elasticsearch server.
Depending on your needs, you can configure Kibana to generate logs for a specific feature.
[source,yml]
----
logging:
  appenders:
    file:
      type: file
      fileName: ./kibana.log
      layout:
        type: json

### gather all the Kibana logs into a file
logging.root:
    appenders: [file]
    level: all

### or gather a subset of the logs
logging.loggers:
  ### responses to an HTTP requests
  - name: http.server.response
    level: debug
    appenders: [file]
  ### result of a query to the Elasticsearch server
  - name: elasticsearch.query
    level: debug
    appenders: [file]

>   ### logs genereated by my plugin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ### logs generated by my plugin
```

  - name: plugins.myPlugin
    level: debug
    appenders: [file]
----

> WARNING: Note that we configured Kibana to produce logs in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/ecs/master/ecs-reference.html[ECS JSON] format. At the moment, it's the only format including meta-information necessary for https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/agent/nodejs/current/log-correlation.html[log correlation] out-of-the-box.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WARNING: Note that we configured Kibana's `file` appender to produce logs in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/ecs/master/ecs-reference.html[ECS JSON] format. At the moment, it's the only format including meta-information necessary for https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/agent/nodejs/current/log-correlation.html[log correlation] out-of-the-box.
```

The next step is to define what https://www.elastic.co/observability[observability tools] are available to you. 

> For a better Developer Experience, we recommend you to set up https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/get-started/current/observability-integrations.html[Observability integration] provided by Elastic to debug your application with reach <<debugging-logs-apm-ui, APM UI.>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a better Developer Experience, we recommend you to set up https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/get-started/current/observability-integrations.html[Observability integration] provided by Elastic to debug your application with the powerful <<debugging-logs-apm-ui, APM UI.>>
```

If you need to debug something quickly without the necessity to set up additional tooling, you can deal with <<plain-kibana-logs, the plain Kibana logs yourselves.>>

[[debugging-logs-apm-ui]]
==== APM UI

> *Prerequisites* Kibana logs are configured to be in ECS JSON format to include tracing identifiers.

Reviewer: How about adding a link to the ECS JSON format here too? 
```suggestion
*Prerequisites* Kibana logs are configured to be in [ECS JSON](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/ecs/master/ecs-reference.html[ECS JSON]) format to include tracing identifiers.
```

If you would like to debug Kibana with Kibana APM UI, you need to set up the APM infrastructure. You can find instructions for the setup process
https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/apm/get-started/current/observability-integrations.html[on this page].

> Once you set up the APM infrastructure, you can enable the APM agent and put Kibana under load to collect APM events. To analyze the collected metrics and logs, use the APM UI as demonstated https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/master/transactions.html#transaction-trace-sample[in the docs].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you set up the APM infrastructure, you can enable the APM agent and put Kibana under load to collect APM events. To analyze the collected metrics and logs, use the APM UI as demonstrated https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/kibana/master/transactions.html#transaction-trace-sample[in the docs].
```

[[plain-kibana-logs]]
==== Plain Kibana Logs

> *Prerequisites* Kibana logs are configured to be in ECS JSON format to include tracing identifiers.

Reviewer: We might also want to add a link to the ECS Json format here too. Adding these links helps a reader if they navigate directly to the `<<plain-kibana-logs, Plain Kibana Logs>>` section.

Open Kibana Logs and search for an operation you are interested in.

> For example, we want to investigate the slowness of `/api/telemetry/v2/clusters/_stats` Kibana endpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, we want to investigate the slowness of the `/api/telemetry/v2/clusters/_stats` Kibana endpoint.
```

> For example, we want to investigate the slowness of the `/api/telemetry/v2/clusters/_stats` Kibana endpoint.

Reviewer: When I read this sentence, it gives me the impression that the `/api/telemetry/v2/clusters/_stats` endpoint is _always_ slow. Maybe we can rephrase this to something more positive, like:
```suggestion
For example, we want to investigate the response times for queries to the `/api/telemetry/v2/clusters/_stats` Kibana endpoint.
```

Open the Kibana Logs and search for the HTTP server response for the endpoint. It looks like the following (some fields are omitted for brevity)
[source,json]
----
{
  "message":"POST /api/telemetry/v2/clusters/_stats 200 1014ms - 43.2KB",
  "log":{"level":"DEBUG","logger":"http.server.response"},
  "trace":{"id":"9b99131a6f66587971ef085ef97dfd07"},
  "transaction":{"id":"d0c5bbf14f5febca"}
}
----

> We are interested in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/ecs/current/ecs-tracing.html#field-trace-id[trace.id] field. It's a unique identifier of a trace. It groups multiple events like transactions that belong together. In this case we search for `"trace":{"id":"9b99131a6f66587971ef085ef97dfd07"}` to get all the logs belonging to the same trace. So you can see how many Elasticsearch requests have been triggered during the `9b99131a6f66587971ef085ef97dfd07` trace, how they looked like, what elasticsearch endpoints were hits, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are interested in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/ecs/current/ecs-tracing.html#field-trace-id[trace.id] field. It's a unique identifier of a trace. It groups multiple events like transactions that belong together. In this case we search for `"trace":{"id":"9b99131a6f66587971ef085ef97dfd07"}` to get all the logs belonging to the same trace. So you can see how many Elasticsearch requests have been triggered during the `9b99131a6f66587971ef085ef97dfd07` trace, what they looked like, what elasticsearch endpoints were hit, etc.
```

> We are interested in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/ecs/current/ecs-tracing.html#field-trace-id[trace.id] field. It's a unique identifier of a trace. It groups multiple events like transactions that belong together. In this case we search for `"trace":{"id":"9b99131a6f66587971ef085ef97dfd07"}` to get all the logs belonging to the same trace. So you can see how many Elasticsearch requests have been triggered during the `9b99131a6f66587971ef085ef97dfd07` trace, what they looked like, what elasticsearch endpoints were hit, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are interested in https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/ecs/current/ecs-tracing.html#field-trace-id[trace.id] field that is a unique identifier of a trace. The `trace.id` gives us a way to group multiple events, like transactions, that belong together. In this case we search for `"trace":{"id":"9b99131a6f66587971ef085ef97dfd07"}` to get all the logs belonging to the same trace. So you can see how many Elasticsearch requests have been triggered during the `9b99131a6f66587971ef085ef97dfd07` trace, what they looked like, what elasticsearch endpoints were hit, etc.
```
